Introduction to the Cyber Assessment Framework

On this page:
1. The CAF – a tool for assessing cyber resilience
2. CAF requirements
3. How the CAF collection is intended to be used - an outcome-based approach
4. CAF principles and contributing outcomes
5. Using IGPs
6. Setting target levels of cyber security and resilience
7. Making the CAF sector speciﬁc
8. Cyber Resilience Audit Scheme
The CAF – a tool for assessing cyber resilience
The NCSC Cyber Assessment Framework (CAF) provides a systematic and
comprehensive approach to assessing the extent to which cyber risks to essential
functions are being managed by the organisation responsible. CAF-based assessments
can be carried out either by the responsible organisation itself (self-assessment) or by
an independent external entity, possibly a regulator / cyber oversight body or a suitably
qualiﬁed organisation acting on behalf of a regulator, such as an NCSC assured
commercial service provider.

The NCSC CAF cyber security and resilience objectives and principles provide the
foundations of the CAF. The 4 high-level objectives (A-D) and the 14 principles laid out
within this collection are written in terms of outcomes, i.e. speciﬁcation of what needs
to be achieved rather than a checklist of what needs to be done. The CAF adds
additional levels of detail to the top-level principles, including a collection of structured
sets of Indicators of Good Practice (IGPs).
Note
The NCSC developed the CAF in its role as national technical authority for cyber
security with an expectation that it would be used, amongst other things, as a tool to
support e ective cyber regulation. The NCSC itself has no regulatory responsibilities,
and organisations subject to cyber regulation should consult with their regulators to
learn whether they should use the CAF in the context of meeting regulatory
requirements.

CAF requirements
The CAF has been developed to meet the following set of requirements:
1. 1
provide a suitable framework to assist in carrying out cyber resilience assessments
2. 2
maintain the outcome-focused approach of the NCSC cyber security and resilience
principles and discourage assessments being carried out as tick-box exercises
3. 3
be compatible with the use of appropriate existing cyber security guidance and
standards
4. 4
enable the identiﬁcation of e ective cyber security and resilience improvement
activities
5. 5
exist in a common core version which is sector-agnostic
6. 6
be extensible to accommodate sector-speciﬁc elements as may be required
7. 7

enable the setting of meaningful target security levels for organisations to achieve,
possibly reﬂecting a regulator view of appropriate and proportionate security
8. 8
be as straightforward and cost-e ective to apply as possible

How the CAF collection is intended to be used - an outcome-based approach
The NCSC is committed to working constructively with regulators, Lead Government
Departments for CNI sectors, industry and other stakeholders to help ensure that the
most nationally important networks and information systems are subject to e ective
cyber risk management regimes. This commitment has shaped the NCSC approach to
developing the CAF collection.
When considering approaches to driving change toward a recognised desirable endstate, two fundamental methods exist:
1. 1
Prescriptive Rules Approach:


In this method, a speciﬁc set of detailed rules is established. These rules
prescribe precisely what actions are permissible and what constitutes
undesirable conduct.



When followed closely, these rules can lead to achieving the desired endstate.



However, there’s a catch: prescriptive rules must account for all possible
scenarios, which can be challenging in complex and rapidly evolving
domains.



Attempting to create exhaustive rules, especially in areas like cyber
security, often results in unintended consequences, misallocation of
resources, and limited beneﬁts.

2. 2
Principles-Based Approach:


Instead of rigid rules, this approach relies on a set of principles to guide
decision-making.



These principles serve as general guidelines, allowing ﬂexibility in
adapting to diverse situations.



The NCSC advocates for this approach, emphasising its e ectiveness in
driving improvements to cyber security and resilience.



Principles align with the majority of goal-based regulations in the UK,
emphasising outcomes over rigid prescriptions.

In summary, while prescriptive rules have their place, the principles-based approach
o ers adaptability and resilience, especially in dynamic ﬁelds like cyber security. This is
why the NCSC has developed such a set of principles as part of the CAF collection.
The CAF principles deﬁne a set of top-level outcomes that, collectively, describes good
cyber security and resilience for organisations performing essential functions. Each
principle is accompanied by a narrative which provides more detail, including why the
principle is important. Additionally, each principle is supported by a collection of
relevant guidance which both highlights some of the relevant factors that an
organisation will usually need to take into account when deciding how to achieve the
outcome, and recommends some ways to tackle common cyber security challenges.
Some organisations may be concerned that the principles and guidance are too vague.
It is important to recognise that the intent is not to produce an all-encompassing cyber
security and resilience “to do” list – an unachievable goal in any case. Organisations
understand their own business better than any external entity, and should be capable of
taking informed, balanced decisions about how they achieve the outcomes speciﬁed by
the principles. The NCSC intends the principles and guidance to be used in the
following way by organisations performing essential functions:

1.
Understand the principles and why they are important.

2.
Interpret the principles for the organisation.

3.
Compare the outcomes described in the principles to the organisation’s current
practices using the guidance.

4.
Identify shortcomings and understand the seriousness of shortcomings using
organisational context and prioritise them.

5.
Implement remediation by addressing prioritised issues using the guidance.

CAF principles and contributing outcomes
Each top-level NCSC security and resilience principle deﬁnes a reasonably wideranging outcome. The precise approach organisations should adopt to achieve each
principle is not speciﬁed as this will vary according to organisational circumstances.
However, each principle can be broken down into a collection of lowerlevel contributing [cyber security and resilience] outcomes, all of which will normally
need to be achieved to fully satisfy the top-level principle.
An assessment of the extent to which an organisation is meeting a particular principle is
accomplished by assessing all the contributing outcomes for that principle. In order to
inform assessments at the level of contributing outcomes:
1. 1
each contributing outcome is associated with a set of indicators of good practice (IGPs)
and,
2. 2

using the relevant IGPs, the circumstances under which the contributing outcome is
judged ‘achieved’, ’not achieved’ or (in some cases) ‘partially achieved’ are described.
For each contributing outcome the relevant IGPs have conveniently been arranged into
table format. The resulting tables, referred to as IGP tables, constitute the basic
building blocks of the CAF. In this way, each principle is associated with several tables
of IGPs, one table per contributing outcome.

Using IGPs
Assessment of contributing outcomes is primarily a matter of expert judgement and
the IGPs do not remove the requirement for the informed use of cyber security expertise
and sector knowledge. IGPs will usually provide good starting points for assessments
but should be used ﬂexibly and in conjunction with the NCSC guidance associated with
the top-level cyber security and resilience principles. Conclusions about an
organisation’s cyber security and resilience should only be drawn after considering
additional relevant factors and special circumstances.
The ‘achieved’ (GREEN) column of an IGP table deﬁnes the typical characteristics of an
organisation fully achieving that outcome. It is intended that all the indicators would
normally be present to support an assessment of ‘achieved’. The exception would be
when an IGP may not be applicable if there are compensating measures that would
meet the requirements of the relevant objective.
The ‘not achieved’ (RED) column of an IGP table deﬁnes the typical characteristics of an
organisation not achieving that outcome. It is intended that the presence of any one
indicator would normally be su icient to justify an assessment of ‘not achieved’.
When present, the ‘partially achieved’ (AMBER) column of an IGP table deﬁnes the
typical characteristics of an organisation partially achieving that outcome. It is also
important that the partial achievement is delivering speciﬁc worthwhile cyber security
and resilience beneﬁts. An assessment of ‘partially achieved’ should represent more
than giving credit for doing something vaguely relevant.
The following table summarises the key points relating to the purpose and nature of
IGPs:

Setting target levels of cyber security and resilience
The result of applying the CAF is 39 individual assessments, each one derived from
making a judgement on the extent to which a set of IGPs reﬂects the circumstances of
the organisation being assessed. The CAF has been designed in such a way that a result

in which all 39 contributing outcomes were assessed as ‘achieved’ would indicate a
level of cyber security some way beyond the bare minimum ‘basic cyber hygiene’ level.
A cyber oversight body will need to set target levels of cyber resilience for organisations
within their sector. One way of setting these target levels is in relation to the ability to
withstand speciﬁed categories of cyber attacks (e.g. resilience to basic capability
attacks, moderate capability attacks etc.) and the CAF has been designed to support
this approach via the idea of CAF proﬁles.
The NCSC has worked with regulators and other organisations with a cyber resilience
oversight role on an approach to interpreting CAF output based on identifying those
contributing outcomes considered most important to achieve in order to manage
security risks to that organisation’s essential functions. Those prioritised contributing
outcomes would correspond to an initial view of appropriate and proportionate cyber
security for that organisation. The subset of contributing outcomes identiﬁed as the
most important in this way would represent an example of a CAF proﬁle – something
that could be used as the basis for setting a target for organisations to achieve.
In practice a CAF proﬁle consists of a mixture of some contributing outcomes to be met
at ‘achieved’, some at ‘partially achieved’ and perhaps some (representing cyber
security capabilities not appropriate at the level of the proﬁle) identiﬁed as ‘not
applicable’.
It is not the responsibility of the NCSC to mandate what represents appropriate and
proportionate (as deﬁned in the NIS Regulations) cyber security and resilience. Any
target set for organisations to achieve in terms of CAF results is for the relevant cyber
oversight body to deﬁne.

Making the CAF sector speciﬁc
The common core of the CAF (consisting of principles, contributing outcomes and
indicators of good practice) is sector agnostic in the sense that it is designed to be
generally applicable to all organisations responsible for essential functions across all
key sectors. It is possible that there will be a need for some sector speciﬁc aspects of
the CAF, which could include the following:
1. 1
Sector-speciﬁc CAF proﬁles
Some target proﬁles may well be sector speciﬁc. As mentioned in the section on setting
target levels, it will be a decision for the relevant cyber oversight body to put an
interpretation on CAF results, which may be from a regulatory perspective.
2. 2

Sector-speciﬁc interpretations of contributing outcomes/IGPs
It may be necessary in some cases for a sector-speciﬁc interpretation of contributing
outcomes and/or IGPs to better clarify meaning within the sector.
3. 3
Sector-speciﬁc additional contributing outcomes/IGPs
There may be circumstances in which sector-speciﬁc cyber security requirements
cannot be adequately covered by an interpretation of a generic contributing outcome or
IGP. In these cases, an additional sector-speciﬁc contributing outcome or IGP may need
to be deﬁned.
The NCSC will continue to work with the full range of CAF stakeholders to determine if
sector-speciﬁc aspects of the CAF are required, and to assist in considering and
introducing changes as necessary.

Cyber Resilience Audit Scheme
To support the use of the CAF, we recommend the use of NCSC’s Cyber Resilience
Audit (CRA) scheme where appropriate. The CRA scheme provides a list of assured
commercial suppliers that can deliver independent CAF-based cyber resilience audits
for customers in a range of sectors. An independent audit is likely to be more reliable
than a self-assessment, providing a more accurate picture of organisational cyber
resilience and informing better cyber resilience assessments at the sector and national
levels.
The NCSC is the CRA scheme owner, working closely with any cyber oversight bodies
(such as cyber regulators) that choose to use the scheme as scheme partners. The
scheme has been built with ﬂexibility in mind, allowing Scheme Partners the ability to
deﬁne their own sector-speciﬁc requirements, assurance, and documentation to act as
a sector-speciﬁc implementation of the CRA scheme.

